Did you know that?
Alright, guys, guys, Mike, very good to have you here.
Thank you for joining us today.
Mike Peter's, the CEO of New Zealand Health Group.
We've got you in for 20 minutes.
Um, how about you just give us a bit of an overview
for, and we'll open it up to members questions.
Yeah, it's fine. Thank you. Yeah. Yeah. Thank you.
Um, thank you for, uh, for inviting me to, uh, to attend.
Um, so I'm, uh, Mike Peters.
I'm the CEO of New Zealand Health Group, uh, which is the,
uh, largest provider of, of health, disability
and community based services, uh, in New Zealand.
Um, we've got over, uh, 10,000 staff.
Uh, most of those are support workers, um,
and we offer around 200 specialist, uh, services.
Um, thanks to the, uh, aged Care Association,
we got invited on the, uh, the trip, uh, to, to Australia,
um, along with, with members around this, this table.
Um, and, uh, it was very, uh, very good, um,
visit, uh, to Australia.
Very, uh, insightful.
Um, and, uh, we learned a, uh, a loss,
uh, from, from over there.
Um, some of the, the observations, um, that, uh,
that I gained, uh, was that, uh, with, um, support workers,
uh, being a big part of our, of our workforce, uh,
Australia implemented a, uh, 25%, uh, increase, uh,
in their support worker wages, um, which occurred,
uh, a couple of years ago.
And this saw, uh, the, uh, support workers, uh,
wages go from, um, go up to $29
and 81 cents, uh, per hour, uh, with the minimum wage, uh,
in Australia being $24, just over $24 in,
uh, in, in New Zealand.
Uh, the entry level for a support worker is 2350.
And, uh, obviously that is where our mini, uh, minimum wage,
uh, since today.
What, uh, Australia noticed when they, uh, they did this was
that it's, uh, it gave, uh, support work
as a, uh, a good career.
Um, it helped to attract and,
and retain people, uh, within, uh,
within the workforce over there for, for aged care.
Um, and, uh, it led to, um, uh, yeah, to,
to improvements in, in productivity.
Uh, a few other things that we, we learned, uh, on the, uh,
on the trip was, um, things around, uh, Australia's gone
to a, an over regulated, uh, type of environment.
Um, so we'd have to be, be careful of, of that with
around assigning, uh, care minutes for, uh, for nurses
and potentially having, uh, having nurses, um, sitting
around, uh, not, uh, doing, uh, nurse related, uh, tasks,
um, for the care Minutes is just
as linked with, uh, with funding.
Uh, we learned that, uh, cross party support is,
is also vital, uh, for there to be brought, uh,
for there be change brought about, uh,
within the aged care sector.
Uh, over there, the two, uh, two major parties, uh,
came together and, uh,
and got this, uh, got a Royal Commission, um, going,
I'm not recommending we do that here.
Um, I see more of a, of a task force, uh,
type, type of approach.
Um, but, uh, I, I thought that, uh,
that cross party support, uh, has led to,
to major outcomes within the, the age sector.
The, uh, independent, uh, pricing authority, uh, was a, uh,
a key, uh, learning, um, from my perspective, uh, over there
where, uh, an independent body, um, comes
to the decision on what's, uh, what funding, um, the, uh,
the sector and, and providers and
and so forth, uh, should be given.
Um, and that's a, uh, that would take away, uh, the,
the funder, uh, versus provider, uh, fight that, uh, that
that generally occurs
and takes away, uh, any, any ambiguity, um, from the, uh,
the funding, uh, rounds that, uh, that, that occurred.
Um, the, the other, uh, couple of of things that, uh,
that I thought was, was interesting was the, um, the,
the range of, of, uh, what support workers, uh,
could do in the home, um, that, uh, is, uh, is not,
not quite done, uh, in Australia under, uh,
things under under nurse delegation, which, um, is,
is done here to, to a certain degree,
but how that could be expanded, uh, to help out with, uh,
with the, the aged care, um, environments, uh,
with people being kept out of the age, residential care
or hospitals, uh, for longer, um, using the workforce that,
uh, that, that we have.
The, uh, the, the last thing, um, from my learnings of the,
uh, of the trip was around, uh, staffing
and the ability for, uh, for, um, public, uh,
sector organizations to utilize, uh, the, uh,
the private sector in terms of, of the staffing up of, uh,
of healthcare facilities.
There was a lot of examples that we learned, uh, in,
in Australia where, um, uh, privates, uh, where,
where the public sector were using private organizations
to staff things like hospitals, aged care facilities,
and, uh, and, and so forth, not taking on the, uh,
the responsibility, uh, on their own to, uh, to staff those,
uh, those facilities.
It was a, it was a very good trip.
Um, and, uh, and, and we learned, uh, we learned a lot
and, uh, findings that I've taken back into the, uh,
the work environments, uh,
that I work on a day-to-day basis.
Thanks, Mike. Lovely to see you again.
Um, and I think we were pretty aligned on our takeaways.
I'm interested with the independent pricing authority.
There's a step before that, isn't there, around costing
and then pricing can be negotiated based on affordability.
Yep. Um, and we were told
that New Zealand might have better baseline information.
Do you see value in costing
and pricing, even if it doesn't go
to an independent authority?
That's my first question. Yep.
The second one is, if you can speak
to us about the differences we saw in rural
and urban, um, models
and what's needed in those different areas.
Yeah. So I, I, I definitely think
that it would be better being an independent, um, authority
that, that took care of, of the costings.
Um, we've seen examples here, uh, in, in New Zealand where,
uh, the funders and providers have come up with different,
different scenarios using the, the, the same data.
And there's been disagreements.
I think the independent piece would, uh, would take, um,
a advantage of that, it would take,
um, would take that away.
Um, so I think, I think independence is key.
Um, in terms of, of the rural, urban, um, pieces,
there was definitely, uh, more issues within the rural,
within the rural environment, um, in Australia, just
with their, uh, w with the way that their, um,
their geography is, is based with, you know, a lot
of rural towns being very, very remote and, and, and rural.
Um, but they used, um, what, what we did find over there was
that, uh, for those rural, um, places, they used a lot
of overseas, uh, workers with, uh,
with partnerships being drawn up with, uh, universities
and other type of educational, um, facilities in Fiji and,
and, uh, Malaysia and, and so forth.
Um, so yeah, there,
there were definitely distinct differences.
Um, I think we, uh, we learned that, uh, the, uh, a lot of,
uh, aged care facilities, uh, in, in Australia have used,
uh, New Zealand as a, as a, uh, a ground to,
to recruit a lot of staff, um, which is probably back to my,
my first point, um, due to the, uh, the money, um,
and it being, uh, it being funded, um, over there.
But you, you didn't think there was, um,
or did you think, um, there, the model
that was used in urban was not necessarily
fit for purpose for rural?
Was that your understanding?
Yes. That's fair. That's fair. Yeah.
Thank you. One group who won't like,
and dependent pricing is the treasury.
They might perceive there's a loss of control over, uh,
uh, public funds.
If, uh, an agency that is not the government is setting, uh,
setting how, how much will be spent in large parts
of the health, health budget, uh, for that argument,
for independent pricing to succeed,
I'd have thought there need to be a case about
how it would reduce other financial risks
that the government might face.
Uh, have you got any idea of what, um, how, how
that would work out?
Because, you know, it seems like a good idea.
It's great that Aussie has, has done it.
Um, uh,
does the government end up paying anyway when the
sustainability of private providers is, um, is challenged
and is is compromised?
And how would the pricing help with that?
Yeah, so the, the independent, uh,
pricing authority in Australia, uh,
the government doesn't have to take it on.
Um, so there's a lot of consultation
and so forth that takes place leading up to the,
the prices, uh, being released.
And it's up to the government, whether they they agree
to it or, or or not.
There's public consultation and, and,
and all of that I think it needs to be,
be looked at in terms of an overall, um, systems, um,
perspective is, um, so I'm speaking, um, from a, a, a home
and community disability, um, area, I think the system needs
to be looked at a, a, as a whole, um, to see
what potentially could that, that workforce, um,
be taken care of, uh,
that would help out in other areas that would save money.
Um, like if I speak to our specific workforce, there's, uh,
a lot of things that we could be doing, uh,
to take away the, um, a way people being in hospital, um,
or the need for people to go to hospital,
if that was utilized.
And, uh, at a, at a cheaper rate, um, as, uh, as well,
one example of that is that, uh,
we run an early supported discharge, uh, program, um, in,
in a couple of places, but one of the, one of the places is,
is down in, down at Christchurch where we, uh,
run the, the Crest.
We're part of a, an alliance
group that runs the Crest Group.
Um, and that's been proven to save, uh, to save money.
If that was rolled out on the, on the whole,
there'd be money that was, was saved there to be able
to invest in, in other areas within
the, uh, the health system. What,
Why would independent pricing help, particularly with
that being taken up,
Uh, is good issue?
So, so when I said it needs to be looked at within the,
within the system, if the independent pricing was looking at
like home and community support, oh, I see.
Potentially utilize savings from that, from that area. Thank
You.
Speaking to the health managed care pricing authority
as after this too, hoish.
Yes. Thanks, mark. Good to see, see you again.
Um, and I'm glad you just mentioned Breast
because of course it's a great Christchurch initiative.
Um, what was your, what was your opinion on
how well New Zealand does aging in place
or at home versus Australia?
Um, and do you think we've got the balance right when it
comes to residential care versus caring
for someone in their own home? Yeah,
I think, uh, residential care is probably the default
position people to be moved into,
to residential care, uh, sooner.
Uh, that, that could be partly down to there not being, uh,
other, um, options that are, that are funded to,
to, to, to, to a degree.
Um, but, uh, yeah, de definitely in Australia got the sense
that there was, um, people were, uh, given the ability
to age at home a lot longer than potentially New Zealand
with other options, um, being there, you know,
we saw the dementia offering with, with, with Hammond Care
and, and so forth.
Uh, over in, in Australia, I think there's, there's better,
um, initiatives and they're funded, um, to be able
to keep people or people at home longer
'cause it's gonna save money for people having to be, uh,
put into, into an age residential, uh, facility.
I think 18 months was given as being the time limit
of a person being in an age residential facility
in, in Australia.
I, uh, I would think that
that would probably be longer in, in New Zealand.
Can I just stop on Yeah, sure. Do.
Do you think in New Zealand people that are getting
to the stage where they need help at home,
do you think people that are aware
of what's available do them?
Uh, not fully, no.
I think, um, potentially they would either, you know, go
to a doctor or, or be given advice from, you know,
places like, uh, a CC or, or
or so forth around what's potentially funded.
Um, people might not necessarily have the full information
about what they could be,
they could be getting at, uh, at home.
One from me, um, Mike, around at Home Care, um,
currently there's, you know, someone can come in,
there's only a limited number
of things they might be able to do.
Do you think more needs to be done
to enable further things to be done? Uh,
Yeah, I think there is. I
think there's so much more that, uh,
that we could be getting, uh,
people going into people's homes to, to do, you know,
look at, uh, whether it's, um, you know,
delivering IV antibiotics where a person doesn't have
to be in, in, in hospital for an extended period of time.
Uh, potentially looking at things like, uh, chemo, um,
in the, uh, in the home, this stuff is done,
is done overseas, um, potentially, uh, you know,
vaccinations, um,
or all of that type of stuff, uh, could be done,
uh, in the home.
And, um, you know, the workforce is,
is there going into people's homes already.
It's about what more could they be, uh,
could they be doing under, under, um,
under a nurse's delegated
or authority, which our workforce, um, does a lot of,
but we keep doing so much more.
Cam, and then you Just asked my question, so
Oh, bounce onto our, with our inquiry, um, we are looking
with a, with a focus on those suffering, you know, uh,
neurological cognitive disorder.
So in terms of what you saw in
Australia and what you learned there.
Yep. Is there anything with that lens on
that you could share with the committee?
Yeah, so, um, you know, you just gotta look at, uh,
what they're doing around dementia care.
Um, there was a, a, a lots of, uh, there was an example
where a, uh, a provider over there went to the, they went
to the government around the dementia care, um, offering.
And that got, uh, that got funded, um, within a, uh,
within a closed, uh, a closed process.
Um, there was stuff that we were, we were seeing, uh, in,
in, in other areas where, um, you know,
people have introduced, uh, things like physical challenges
for people that are suffering with dementia,
that's shown results in terms of improving their cognitive,
um, ability.
Um, and also in, uh, in some of the, uh, the homes that we,
uh, we went into around different initiatives
that are taking place in there that could be done also in,
in people's homes, um, as well.
Yeah. So there was, uh, there, there was a little bit
of learning from, from that perspective.
Um, I'm still following up with some detail around, around
that that I could share, um, once I, once I get it.
Um, but yeah, there were learnings,
Mike, uh, a few questions come up around respite care.
And so you've got, trying to have people age live at home,
um, but often not the big burden of
that falls on the other spouse, right?
Yep. And the New Zealand
or Spike is given, um, you know,
when the care is showing signs of strain, um,
do you think we need to do more to implement a revolving
or regular spike program?
Yeah, I, I, I think it's needed.
Um, I think, um, you know, carer stresses is, uh,
it can involve in a person having to leave home, um,
sooner the person that they're looking after.
Yeah. That's where going, yeah. Yeah.
So, um, you know, anything to help, uh, with, uh,
with a respite service that a person could call upon, uh,
more regularly, I think would, uh, would help out with,
um, with that.
And, you know, there's not, uh, there's not that many, um,
services that are, uh, are offered, um, with the number
of people that, uh, that are suffering from,
you know, cognitive decline.
Thank you, Carlos.
I just want to ask, uh,
how Australia model can address the diversity
and cultural differences, especially on the Asian community?
Yeah, so, uh, that's good. Good, good, good question.
Because we, we went to a, um, we, we went to one, uh,
pro provider, um, where they, they do, uh,
have age residential facilities, uh,
for different culturally, um, diverse, um, ethnic groups.
Mm-hmm. Um, so the, uh, the one
that we went into was an Italian Mediterranean, um, one, uh,
and then we learned that there was others set up, uh,
as well for the Asian community, um,
and other, uh, diverse, uh, ethnic groups, um, that were,
that, uh, revolved around their individual cultural needs.
Um, and so they, they, uh, they arranged the care, um,
and what they're offering, uh, to suit what the,
the person was used to from their cultural background.
So, because I wasn't on the trip,
so I just wanna ask a little bit more.
So how big are we talking about those facility?
Is, is it within a big building
that allocates certain section
for each resource individual rooms?
It's, uh, it's an individual dedicated, um, uh,
uh, age facility.
Uh, not, not rooms or anything like that.
They, they, they'd, uh, they'd set up, um, individual, uh,
rest homes or age residential communities, um, that were,
uh, were based around, uh, an ethnic, ethnic group. Yeah.
Sure. Thank you. Thank you.
Any other questions from members? Mark? Thank you very much.
Oh, sorry. Just Oh, that's fine.
What, what would be the most important thing, um,
that we could do from what, what you've learned?
What do you think is the biggest thing we could,
Uh, I think the biggest thing is, uh, probably two things.
Yeah. I think it's, um, around the, uh, the recognizing,
uh, support workers for what they do.
Um, so the, uh, I definitely think there needs to be, um,
some form of a funding uplift that addresses, uh,
support worker wages, um, that's, uh, that's fully funded
and is, is passed on, um, to, to support workers.
So we get a bigger gap between, uh, our entry level rate
for a support worker and minimum wage,
just like they've got in Australia.
Yeah. Um, so it recognizes them.
And then there's, there's, there's step levels,
um, within that.
And then I think LinkedIn with that, um, is, is around
what more could
that support worker workforce be doing in the home, as of,
as I've addressed, expanding
their scope, expanding their scope.
Yeah. There's a range of o
of different things that they could be doing.
So you get cost savings and,
and other areas of, of the health systems to be able to,
to fund that from people not being in, in, in, in hospital.
And I think the, um, I know I said two things,
but I think the third thing is, is probably to help with
that, um, in LinkedIn with the overall, um, systems approach
of the healthcare, uh,
system would be the independent pricing authority.
Oh, sweet. Yep. Alright. Thank you very much.
Very good to have you here this afternoon. Thank you.
Good to see you. Okay, thanks.
We've got Excellent. Okay.
Michael, professor,
professor Michael Vin, very good to have you here.
Um, good to see you again.
Got a number of members around, uh,
the committee table you see, but we see you
and, um, looks to be a lovely day in Sydney.
It wasn't when we were there, but it looks wonderful today.
No, no. So I'll hand it over to you, Michael, if you wanna,
um, make some remarks
and then leave us some time for questioning.
That would be fantastic. Thank you.
Thank you. And thank you so much for, uh, the invitation
to attend today, uh, especially virtually.
I've actually spoken at, um, three aged care conferences
around Australia this week, so I was very grateful, uh, not
to, to have to fly out, uh, for the conversation.
So thank you very much for that.
I'll just very briefly talk about the background of ipa, um,
because it put, it puts some of the, um, questions, I think,
and certainly some of the comments by the previous attendee,
um, into, um, uh, a better perspective.
So, um, I, hepa used to be ipa, it used
to be the Independent Hospitals Policy Authority,
and it came out of a national agreement
between the Commonwealth government states
and territories, uh, in 2010, uh,
which implemented a national program of
activity-based funding for the hospital sector.
That was after a long history
of basically block funding and agreements.
Now, uh, at the end of the day,
and it's very much, you know, a character of Australia's,
uh, federalism, the states didn't trust the
commonwealth to set the price.
The commonwealth didn't trust the states
to set, set the price.
And, um, by, by reputation,
the prime minister had really had enough
of the arguments between overrun.
And so it was his idea
to set up an independent pricing authority so
that all parties could have confidence in
the referee's decision.
Um, we've been operating mostly in hospitals
for the last 12 years
and very successfully, um, up until COVID, it's safe to say
that all of the prices that we set were well within,
uh, our treasury's budget parameters.
So they were very happy with those results.
Um, and even up until, um,
the last national efficient price, which we cast
for the 20 25, 20 26 financial year,
which was a significant increase over previous prices,
the confidence remains.
So, while, uh, no one was promising to send us, um,
gift hampers to thank us for our latest price,
they were certainly confident in the rigor
with which the price had been struck.
So, um, two
and a half years ago, uh, we received a letter from the
Minister for Health, asking us to take on the issue
of pricing or providing pricing advice.
He sets the price, so we're providing pricing advice
for residential aged care to the Minister
for Health and Aging.
Uh, and a few weeks
after that, they added aged care supported home services
to the, the, the list we spent the next year
starting our first ever national cost collections in aged
care and aged care supported home services, as well
as providing, if you like, a bespoke price.
For the first year of our involvement,
that price was drawn from cost reports coming out
of the, um, residential care sector, in particular,
the quarterly financial reports
and annual financial reports that are held
by the department, uh, as well as
some wage decisions from the Fur Work Commission Australia,
uh, which significantly increased the wages
of many aged care workers over, um,
three stages, uh, coming onto the fourth stage.
So significant increase of up to 30% that was fully funded
by the Commonwealth government as part
of an election commitment.
Um, where are we now?
So we're in our third national costing study.
Uh, the prices have increased well within
budget parameters, so treasury, finance, uh,
and our central agencies still have
confidence in the work that we do.
We still undertake the process the same way as we do
with the hospital pricing.
And I think this comes into how we've maintained confidence
and the, the, if you like, the asset that we bring
to the systems, it is all heavily data driven,
and that data comes from the services themselves.
We're interested only really in cost and activity data,
and, uh, that is
provided voluntarily through, um, contractors that we bring
to do the cost collections.
We will then go through a process of validating that data
to make sure that it's complete, that it's
as accurate as can be.
We will ask questions if we find anomalies in the data,
the process that then goes through to the calculation
of the price is covered first by a pricing framework,
and we publish that pricing framework
and open it for public consultation as well as of course,
you know, feedback from providers, from funders,
from insurance companies and so on.
Uh, the pricing framework then meets the data.
We will cast a price
and issue a price determination, which goes through
how we've calculated the price,
what the data was telling us,
and what the final results are, including, um, waitings
for rural, for remote, for specialized services that cover,
uh, indigenous Australians
or, um, specialized services for homeless Australians.
That issue of transparency is I think probably one
of the great keys to why, um, we've lasted 14 years
and despite a lot of dynamic
movement in the cost collection over COVID
and, um, some significant increases in the costs
of both systems, while we,
why we still retain that confidence from governments, from
providers and from the industry generally, is
because everything we do, we put out on public display, it's
of course not in an identifiable way.
You won't find the names of a particular facility
or any group of patients in there,
but the data that we've gathered, uh,
is all displayed publicly.
The way we assemble a price,
the way we calculate these differences in weightings.
All of that is provided not just in publication,
but through a period of public consultation.
And we get a lot of engagement in those publications.
Um, we also get a lot of requests, uh, from, uh,
academia if they can share the, um, data that we've got
and some of our analysis
to enable further academic research.
So it's very much a high priority operation.
It does very rigorous work, and it does very rigorous work.
Transparently, not so much in aged care.
Um, we've been welcoming the conversation around aged care
with New Zealand, but on the hospital front, we're currently
providing our classification structures to
around 43 44, uh, countries.
And in terms of the pricing methodology, you'll see
that pop up in countries such as Saudi Arabia, uh,
the Republic of Ireland and, and many others.
Uh, we're about to host, uh,
our national conference in August.
We'll be having that in Adelaide,
and we are getting a significant amount
of international interest in coming to the conference.
We'll be presenting amongst other things, some of the work
that, uh, you've been talking about here today.
So I think really that's, that's as quickly
as I can cover 14 years history,
and I'm very happy to answer any
questions the committee might have. Thank
You, Ingrid. Thanks
very much. Lovely to see you again.
And you've mentioned the Australian context
and the need for independence due
to the federal and state system.
We don't have that in New Zealand. In my, uh, colleague Dr.
Vero was quite rightly mentioned, the lack
of accountability in some ways from independent body.
Everything you've dis that you have discussed around, uh,
costing in particular could be done
by a government agency if it was done rigorously based on
data provided to it in its own consultation
and done in a transparent way, given
that the pricing is still a negotiation
with the minister of the day.
Um, so my question to you is, do you see that as, as a way
of doing this effectively, you've talked about the value
of independence, but in an environment where we are wanting
to keep it closer to government, it's the costing really,
that is the, the, the critical part, isn't it,
which is currently missing in the New Zealand context.
Um, that's a, it's a very
interesting question you've just put to me.
Um, so yes, the original, um, conception of IPA
as we used to be, uh, as independent
and reporting to the Minister for health was a function
of federalism, no doubt about that.
But it has been maintained through, um, I think four
or five changes of government, uh, since then as a result
of confidence in the work that we do
and, uh, in, if you like, uh, concerns
by all the stakeholders of
what would happen if it was moved into a government agency.
So aged care pricing was held, uh, within the Department
of Health and Aging up until two and a half years ago.
But due to, um, issues of confidence by the sector
and concerns about, um,
how prices pricing were being derived,
there was a call from the sector from the Royal Commission
that was held here and in, um, other forums
to move pricing from the department to ipa.
And that's how we became I hpa.
So, uh, it's, we didn't go looking for aged care pricing.
It was a response to concerns raised
through the Royal Commission about how a,
a core government agency, um, was undertaking that pricing
and the pressures on that government agency
to make decisions that went outside the costing data.
I'd add to that, that last year we also undertook a review
of the National Disability Insurance Scheme
and its pricing methodology, really driven by a review,
uh, undertaken by, um, the Prime Minister's department
that raised similar concerns about having the operator
of the scheme also setting its own prices.
And there are two different points of view on that.
I think your question reflects those.
For some that's a conflict of interest for others,
it's an alignment of incentives,
but the pressure from the sector
and from other quarters to move that pricing function
to us also, um, has actually gained momentum
since we submitted our report
to the minister late last year.
Um, yes, we are an independent body
that independence happens in a single moment,
and that is when they set the price for the hospitals.
In every other respect, we're a government agency,
we're a statutory authority that has a board,
the pricing authority that reports
direct to the Minister for Health.
The contact between us
and the Minister for Health is frequent.
Um, it would be weekly if, if not even less than that.
And the, uh, contact
and collaboration with the department is something
that is continual and daily.
So yes, we we're independent,
but only in respect to the setting
of the price in that moment.
In every other respect, we're an integral part of the health
and age care systems,
And I take it from everything you've said,
and from what we saw in Australia, there is now a body
of expertise and a, a process that I guess is quite unique
to your own organization that then is transferrable
and that's why you are getting these
requests from other places.
Yes. So I can appreciate that. Thank you. Yeah,
You're welcome. Thank you,
Parish.
Excellent. Thank you. Thank you, Michael.
And I appreciate, um, you coming online to talk to us,
and it was good to see you over, over in Sydney.
Um, since, since your authority has taken over the pricing,
has there been much change in the supply of aged care beds
or a change in, in, um, what sort
of sectors are, are supplying that?
And I suppose it's kind of really getting to the point.
Um, how'd you know, if you've got the price right?
Um, there, there are all sorts of ways.
I'll, I'll cut to the easiest one first.
So our aged care sector,
and I suspect like yours, uh,
isn't backward in coming forward.
We do engage with them directly.
We've got a very vast, um, aged care consultation network.
And I meet personally frequently with some
of the major providers as well as the peak bodies.
And, uh, if they didn't like the price,
they would let me know, trust me.
Uh, but, but moreover, we do monitor
how the sector's going in terms of openings and closures.
And what we are seeing is improving confidence in pricing
and in the aged care reforms.
Now, very hard for me to say that confidence is all related
to the fab job that we're doing with pricing,
because at the same time, government has recognized, uh,
that pay issue, uh, with, uh, aged care workers,
in particular with nurses working in aged care.
There's been a substantial uplift in wages
that are fully funded by the Commonwealth government.
And at the same time, government is implementing
many other reforms around care minutes, um, around access,
around co-payments.
And of course, you know, the, the actual classification for,
uh, aged care residents, which is also the, the, um,
the pricing classification, which is the anac.
Now, we didn't develop the anac.
Um, it is an activity based model.
Uh, there's still some, um, uh,
observations being made about how the implementation of
that is going and whether it's more
or less complex than the last system.
Um, but implemented it has been,
and the funding that goes along with that has been also, um,
as I said, substantially increased
and done in a way which enables us to monitor
how successful it's been.
I guess the only other thing I would add to that is that
government or the department has a large
section which, um, provides grants
for sustainability for those facilities, which are deemed
to be essential in various areas of Australia
and who are struggling to maintain their sustainability.
Uh, as well as providing the grants.
There is a significant review process,
as you would imagine before.
Um, those sorts of offers are made to the provider,
and thus far we've had no feedback
that the reason why a particular facility may have become
unviable is anything to do with the price.
So the waitings for rural
and remote areas for specialized services appear
to be correct and valid,
and the base pricing seems to be sufficient
to keep those services viable and open.
Excellent, thank you. Oh, um, can, can you exp
can you give a bit bit of a rough indication
of the weighting that gets put on the price for rural?
Um, and of course you will have, you'll have very remote
locations in Australia.
Um, can you, um, I appreciate, I'm asking how long a piece
of string is, um,
but what, what sort of waitings do, do some
of those areas get?
Um, if it's okay with you
and the committee, can I provide you
a written briefing on that?
I'm only saying that because the, the weightings, um,
are drawn from a, um, uh, mechanism
or a, a policy, uh, called the Triple M,
the modified Monash model.
Monash University originally developed it,
the TripleM has seven different, um, regional levels,
and within that there are also waitings
for indigenous services and specialized services.
So the, the, it's not so much a, um, the answer is as long
as a piece of string, it's a very specific answer,
but the weightings go from zero to substantial
and there's six levels in the middle of that.
Uh, it also covers, as you would imagine, uh,
level one is central, uh, uh, metropolitan areas
out to the most remote at level seven.
But there's also an ability to enhance that
because almost all those very remote services are providing,
uh, residential care for aboriginal people only.
So that gets compounded with the TripleM seven.
Um, and there's exemptions,
or sorry, exceptions within the TripleM model for
anomalous locations and anomalous means towns
or cities like Kal Goly
or Mount Isa, where you've got a really large population
and a, and a huge mining industry around them,
but they're actually very isolated.
So their cost structures are different
for all sorts of reasons.
And so the adjustment that applies to them is different,
but I'll be more than happy to send you, um,
some briefing material on how those adjustments work
and the, the tool that we use.
Excellent. Thank you. That'd be interesting.
Can I do one very quick summary? Oh, you might.
Tha thanks very much. My takeaway from, um,
the whole trip was actually the urban model didn't
seem fit for purpose.
Everybody I spoke to who was dealing with rural
or remote felt that it stifled innovation
and that a lot of the community-based solutions, um,
needed more flexibility and the chance to breathe
and still be regulated to levels of standards of care.
But, but perhaps more in a bulk funded way if you were
that the horse is bolted.
But if you are recreating the system now,
would you apply the same pricing mechanism
or would you have more leeway
and perhaps something different
for those rural slash remote places?
Um, I think those challenges are being recognized.
So we're currently, um, in
two different spheres, uh, being funded by government
to undertake, uh, reviews of rural
and remote adjustments both for the hospital
and healthcare sector and for the aged care sector.
Uh, there's also another model which is, um,
very much a hybrid of everything that we've mentioned today,
uh, called the multipurpose service,
which is very much a locally driven service configuration
with local leadership
where you can pull funds from aged care, from private
practice and from, um, normal public hospital funding.
And, uh, the, the multipurpose services
NPSs go everything from a two bed nursing post
in remote coastal western Australia through
to my favorite one because I used to visit a lot, um,
in a town called Oatlands in Tasmania, which has, uh,
around 20 acute beds.
It's got 10 residential care units,
it's got an ambulance depot, a general practitioner,
and all sorts of services in it.
Um, it's a cherished model
because it works so well in those sort
of remote struggling communities.
But in other respects, yes, it's been recognized
that we do need to review the operational funding for rural
and remote health services.
Um, in terms of stifling innovation, that's a,
that's a really challenging one.
And, uh, I would assume
after it's been operating for a couple more years,
maybe there'll be an evaluation of how the implementation
of the anac, the activity based funding model has gone.
Uh, interestingly, you know, we are on the other side
of it looking at different models
of block funding rural hospitals.
So hopefully
what we learn from those small rural hospitals will be
translatable in terms of, uh,
funding model development across two residential care
and of course, aged care supported home services.
Thank you. Sorry, I dropped my pen.
Um, uh, professor, thank you very much for,
for being with us today.
That was, uh, very enlightening
and useful, I'm sure for the committee.
Appreciate your time. Thank
You very much. You are welcome.
Thank you.
Okay, our next, uh, session is with Tom Simson.
Tom Simson, very good to have you here.
The CEO of Aging Australia. Welcome to the Health Committee.
Um, good to see you again.
Uh, we have members all around the table here.
Um, it'd be helpful for us.
And I, I know a lot of us probably saw you
in New New Zealand.
Um, when was that? Last year? Yeah,
It Was last year. It was last
year. Yeah. That was really good.
Um, so if you want to give us a, a, a overview of, of
what you think are the things that are making the,
the biggest impacts in Australia and,
and what you potentially see us doing here,
what would be useful here?
Um, and then leave us some time for questions.
We've got 20 minutes all up.
Uh, that would be good. Thank you, Tom.
Uh, you are very welcome
and it's good to see you all again.
Um, and uh, I think this is a really good initiative
to be following up on the, on the trip that a number
of you made, uh, to Australia,
where I know you saw a huge variety of things
and I was just listening to Michael, uh, talking.
Um, you know, the way our system is governed,
the way our system is, uh, um, uh, uh, kind of funded, uh,
and the role of the different independent, uh, players in
that I think is, is actually there's some of the things
that I would suggest New Zealand can,
can take from our system.
There are also plenty
of things, things that we've done wrong.
And I think I heard Ingrid talking about the impact on
innovation, uh, and in rural communities and,
and the lack of block funding.
That's one of the ones you might want to learn, uh, from us
as a, as a thing not to follow.
Um, but we, you know, just a little bit of context,
we are the, the, the sole peak really, um,
for residential providers, home care providers.
Uh, and we're also, uh, we've got, uh, a lot
of retirement living operators in our membership.
We've got about 1100 members, uh,
members in every state and territory.
Uh, and, um, uh, we have every type of ownership structure,
not-for-profit, for-profit, faith-based, community owned,
uh, a and every range
of size from multi-billion dollar organizations that deliver
all three of those service types
to very small single site residential providers,
aboriginal organizations, uh, home care providers
that might only deliver to 50 people.
Um, and everything in between.
Uh, particularly we're also interested in the interface
between our system and all of the others.
'cause one of the things we really do struggle with,
with our federal system, which you do not have to, uh,
grapple with, definitely don't ever go there.
It was a mistake. Um, uh, uh,
but then that was done 1901, so it's too late to fix now.
Uh, uh, systems that we interact with are often managed by,
uh, either both levels of government
or all three if you include local, uh,
or they're completely separate
and never the twain shall meet.
So one of the things that we, uh, that we spend a lot
of time talking about is the interface
with the health system, the interface
with the disability system, uh, the interface
with preventative care, uh, mental health,
and all of those other areas which we're probably less
able to fix than you are.
And I think that's where we can learn from you.
Uh, right at the moment, um,
our main focus is on our New Age Care Act.
You would know that we had a Royal Commission, uh,
that finished well over three years ago now.
Um, that, uh, stated quite bluntly
that our system had not been well funded and well governed,
but also that we did not deliver high enough quality
and, uh, le high enough levels of safety
of care to Australians.
And we needed to improve. Government needed
to fund us better, but the sector needed to lift its game.
We are now right at the end of delivering the very last, uh,
recommendations of that Royal Commission.
Uh, the most difficult to deliver was a new age care act.
Uh, our current act dates back
to 1997 when the world was a very different place.
Uh, and so the New Age Care Act, which was passed last year
and we're very proud of the fact that it was passed
with bipartisan support,
which you would probably guess in
Australia's not very common.
Um, a and, uh, that was due to come in on the 1st of July.
It's now been deferred to the 1st of November
because we all agreed, including government, none
of us were ready and we want this reform
to succeed, not fail.
Uh, but the main reason for that reform as well
as responding to the Royal Commission's recommendation
that we needed to talk about the human rights
of older people in our act.
The previous one doesn't mention them.
Um, in fact, it almost doesn't mention older people.
It's all about the funding relationship
between government and a provider.
Uh, but also, uh, we need
to make sure we can deliver enough care
to the people who are gonna need it.
We are probably just about okay at the moment.
Uh, but we're up towards 98, 90 9% full in our residential
care sector in most parts of the country.
Uh, and this act is supposed to open up funding, uh,
and capacity so that we can meet the needs
of the aging population.
The big change for us, which will be, you know,
if you choose to go down this line,
it was a challenging national conversation for us.
It will be for you actually asking people
to pay more if they can afford to.
Uh, 'cause we are one of the most generous, uh,
countries in the developed world when it comes
to the proportion of care, uh, funded, uh, by the taxpayer.
In home care it's 95% of the total cost.
And in residential care it's about 75%.
Uh, and for many people it's, it's
because that's an average, they pay nothing.
Um, and that was what was causing our sector
to go essentially bankrupt.
Um, and so the, the conversation you've just had
with Michael Pavan, uh,
where the pricing is set independently has been part
of getting us sustainable
because it means it's hard for governments
to hide from the true cost, uh,
'cause those costing studies have to be made public.
Uh, but now also making sure we've got
capacity that we're building.
Again, we haven't built enough beds,
we haven't built really anything for years, uh,
and that we're delivering enough home care.
'cause most people will tell you they want
to be delivered their services in their home.
They actually want to die in their own home.
And, um, we need to enable that.
So there's a lot going on on for us right at the moment.
We are at the tail end of
that Royal Commission implementation
process, thank goodness.
'cause we actually want to move beyond the Royal Commission.
It is still a cloud that hangs over us.
Uh, but quality's improved. Wages have gone up.
Um, funding's gone up drastically, uh, as a, a result of
that, uh, uh, that inquiry, uh,
and confidence in the sector has grown,
but there's still a fair way to go.
So, um, that's my kind of opening.
Um, but very happy to answer any questions that you have.
Thank you, Tom. Um, I'll lead off with one
and I, it was from that breakfast we were having in
Canberra, that cold morning, very early flight, always
Cold in Canberra.
Um, it it was around residential care providers
and, um, about them, how they should be able
to provide healthcare and homes.
You can do that in Australia,
I don't believe we can in New Zealand.
Is that correct? And, and that
there was a recommendation you made.
And is there some wording
that you can get to us around that?
Yeah, so, so um, it, I've got, you know,
there's the big picture changes
that you probably need to look at.
But one of the immediate things you can do is at the moment,
health New Zealand Tepa Aura will not contract
unless they've changed it in the last few months.
They will not contract home care services
to a residential provider
or residential services to a home care provider,
which is why you have this very distinct split.
Yeah. Between the, the residential
and the home care care sector, a lot
of our members deliver both, uh,
and a, a lot of our retirement operators deliver home care.
Um, so it's quite unusual to us that you would have
that contracting restriction.
And because it's a contracting
restriction, you can change it.
You know, essentially Health New Zealand can just do it
differently if they are instructed to do so.
I don't believe there's a legal impediment.
I assume there is some reason why it was put in place in the
first place, but nobody in New Zealand could give me a
particularly good reason for it.
Uh, and it might be one of these kind of, oh,
well it made sense in 1932, so we'll still do it.
Uh, I, I'd get rid of that immediately.
Um, uh, even if you keep the contracting model you have at
the moment, which we don't have in our system,
the money goes with the person
and they can choose the provider both in
home care and in resi.
Uh, uh, but if you keep that,
or even in the interim it, what it allows is,
particularly in those rural communities,
you're trying a community's trying
to sustain two organizations, one that does the res E
and one that does the home care.
And there's not enough money or staff to go around.
So in our country, they deliver both
and they'd be free to do so.
It does also allow for greater innovation
because organizations that can deliver both
can actually follow the trajectory of the older person
through their aging,
rather than her being cut off at the knees as soon
as they need residential care.
Thank you Asha.
Yeah, thanks, uh, Tom, I didn't, um, make it on the,
on the trip, but I've been listening carefully
and attended your presentation, um,
and at Parliament, um, last year
and yeah, look, sounds like there's lots of, um,
benefits in the way commissioning is done in Australia.
Uh, you previously mentioned commissioning for diversity
of people, um, different, uh, combining different, um,
services in the same contract.
You've just, uh, just raised that about, uh, residential
and in-home, um, care.
But I think we've also heard about, um, uh,
using contracts to keep people out of hospital
and the money following the patient.
So a lot of innovative things that are being done with, um,
contracting in Australia or commissioning.
Um, so it just makes me wonder how much is this enabled
by the new structure set up and the independent mechanism?
Um, or could
that all just be done if Health New Zealand organized itself
a bit a bit better?
So I guess what I'm getting at is, you know,
there'll be costs around setting up a new entity
and we'll have to justify
how the new entity makes a difference.
So how does that independence help with all the other stuff?
Or could we just ask Health New Zealand
to start commissioning for a sort
of more representative range
of outcomes than it currently does?
Yeah, so, so I mean the, the independent pricing
that you just heard about is a relatively new innovation
for us only a couple of years.
And actually for the first year we didn't get any pricing
'cause they were doing their costing study.
So it's very new, uh,
and we've been able to do these things before that.
So it's not at all dependent.
Of course, independent costing
and independent pricing is a game changer
because nobody can hide from the true costs.
And when wages go up by 4%
and your funding only goes up by one, government can't go,
oh, but there's a secret formula we can't tell you about,
which is what used to happen.
But actually we don't commission and we don't contract.
So the key difference between the way our system operates
and yours is there is no contract
between the government and the provider.
The contract is between the individual
and the provider they choose.
The government provides the funding to enable that
to take place in your system.
Uh, everybody who delivers care, either residential
or home-based is given a contract by Health New Zealand, uh,
and has to comply.
Uh, and, and they therefore are
the customer of Health New Zealand.
Ours is flipped on its head.
Providers are the, the customer
of the provider is the older person
and the government's role is funding and regulation.
And of course it has a very significant interest in making
sure we do what they think they should, we should be doing.
Uh, uh, but that contracting piece is taken out entirely.
Now, there are some downsides to that
because it means that you have to rely on a market
and a market does not necessarily exist
everywhere in the country.
In fact, in some of our capital
cities, it doesn't really exist.
Uh, so you need some sort of overlay
where government can influence service delivery, uh,
and we need to do better at that.
Uh, so getting rid of your contracting altogether, uh, you,
you might not wanna do that.
Uh, you might want to have a bit of a half
and half kind of situation.
Um, but uh, it does free up providers to respond
to the needs of older people rather than the needs of,
with the greatest of respect to bureaucrat who needs
to balance the budget for the hospitals.
Thanks for a very honest and comprehensive Thank you.
That was good. That was great. I can be,
I can be more honest than you with you
than I can be in Australia.
Great. Great to see you Tom.
Um, just keen for you to, um, talk
to us a little bit about measuring the right things
and the perverse outcomes that have occurred
through the care Minutes and an input space system
and what that has meant for other levels of care
and how we might avoid that pitfall.
Uh, clearly it was a response to the Royal Commission,
but it's had some interesting outcomes.
It absolutely, and very nice to see you too, Ingrid.
Um, the, uh, the challenge with our Royal Commission,
and I dunno if, if you have this kind
of outcome in New Zealand, but
whenever we call one of these things, they come up
with some very, very specific recommendations
and some very broad recommendations.
And governments are then left with, well,
do we implement the whole thing as a roadmap
or do we pick the bits we like
and get criticized for ignoring the rest?
What happened here was the government implemented every
recommendation or committed
to every recommendation except the ones
that were just totally politically unacceptable.
Like the one that said we should have an entirely new tax
just to pay for aged care.
Well, you are all politicians,
you know how that would've gone down.
Um, so we, uh, they didn't do that,
but some of the recommendations were just
what was best argued in the room as opposed to
what there was evidence for.
And so you've mentioned the care minutes.
We now have to have 215 minutes of care
per resident per day in every residential facility in the
country, including 44 minutes of registered nursing care.
Now, is that the right number? Nobody knows.
There's no evidence that it is, it's just
what we've ended up going for.
Uh, obviously the nursing community had a view, uh,
providers had a view and we've ended up with a number.
There's no evidence for, uh, it may well make people safer,
it may well improve care, but we don't know
and we don't know if it's the right number,
too high, too low, whatever.
Uh, and it has led to a huge problem
with recruiting enough degree qualified registered nurses.
We're still 5,000 short today
and that's with the number of, of of services
that we we provide now. And we know they're, and
That's with all our New Zealand nurses as well.
Yep. I'm sorry to say it's, we're full
of New Zealand nurses, but we're also full of English
and American and European and,
and sadly we have the ethical issue
that we're actually draining, uh, you know, Africa
and Southeast Asia, which we've just gotta stop doing.
Um, but we, we measure, we measure things based on, we,
we are not good at measuring qua measuring quality of life.
We are very good at me measuring widgets.
One of the things that Michael's organization is
spectacularly good at is measuring the cost of delivering
what we deliver today.
What they are not able to do is measure the cost of
what we should be delivering.
And so measuring quality of life for people with dementia,
we know over 50% of people in residential care have dementia
and probably more than that.
Uh, we are not good at that.
We ask, we, we ask them survey questions.
Well, with people with cognitive decline,
that's not necessarily the best way
to measure whether they're having
a good time and a good life.
Uh, but we fall back on those old fashioned models.
So I think the thing that, that we, we need to do better
and that you can learn, uh,
is focus more on quality of life.
Uh, ask people what they want
and deliver that rather than the thing
that fits in the bureaucratic box.
And, you know, 200 care minutes, 215 care minutes,
measure whether it actually improves the work,
uh, satisfaction of nurses.
'cause that was one of the big drivers.
Uh, the, uh, ability to access clinical care for residents,
uh, and the quality and safety that's being delivered.
And if you can measure those
and then link them back to the care minutes,
fine. No issue. And,
And the opportunity cost of other activities, it might be
Well, yeah, what what we've seen is we've spent
so much time focusing on nursing
and on personal care workers is a real decline in the
availability of allied health.
A real decline in the availability of kind
of lifestyle activities
because we've been told
by government do this focus on the clinical stuff.
We are not a clinical environment.
We are a residential environment with a clinical overlay.
And the residential bit is actually
what most people will tell us they care about.
Of course, you've gotta get the clinical right.
So measure the right things
and don't fall for the easy round number, 215 minutes,
we'll fix everything 'cause it won't.
Thank you. Excellent. Very good to see you again, Tom.
Um, now I can't remember whether, whether we discussed this
with you or not, or whether it was one of our other visits,
but the importance of breaking down the costs,
whether it be residential clinical care, personal care,
or hoteling, I think was the term term used.
Can you explain to the committee why you think it's
important to have those separated?
Yeah. So you have one price,
and the problem with one price is
that you can hide a multitude of sins in that price.
Uh, it is also much harder for a provider to use it
as an indicator of what government prioritizes, uh,
and where it wants go, uh,
where government wants the provider to focus its resources.
So we have a three pronged funding model.
We have funding for the clinical, which is what Michael,
um, uh, costs.
Uh, we have funding for the daily services
or the hoteling, which is your laundry, your cleaning, um,
your, you know, your power bills, whatever else it might be
to, to be in that, in that facility.
And we have the accommodation, which is basically a rent,
uh, that pays for the bricks and mortar.
Um, and the, the splitting of those things means
that everybody can see what they're up for.
Firstly, what am I paying for?
What, uh,
'cause people do have to contribute towards the cost of
that residential, uh, that residential
care, although not a huge amount.
Um, but it also allows government to see
what we're spending on what, uh, so they give us an amount
for care through the anac.
That's based on the complexity
and the need of the individual.
It's got about, I think it's 13 levels.
It's probably not nuanced enough.
Um, but it, that, that comes in, uh, to pay
for the nursing care and the personal care
and all of the other things that we need
to do from a clinical perspective.
And then the individual pays themselves,
even if they are a full pensioner,
we don't have universal access to the pension.
Uh, so that's the difference.
Um, but if they're eligible for the full pension,
they still have to pay the cost of those daily services,
the food, uh, and the laundry and the cleaning.
Um, it just comes out of their pension
and they're left with 15% of the pension
to spend on other things for themselves.
And then the accommodation, if they are, uh, uh,
considered in need, uh, government pays it for them and
otherwise they pay the full cost.
And it makes it easier for you to have
that conversation about should wealthier people pay more,
uh, in order for there to be enough subsidy
to pay for people with less.
Because you can say, well, you're not gonna pay
for the clinical stuff 'cause the government does that.
Uh, that's, that's the way it should be.
'cause 40 year olds get their care for free in a hospital.
Why shouldn't 80 year olds, uh,
in a residential environment?
Um, so splitting it out, it makes it much less emotional
and much less emotive.
But it also allows for government to see
what are we doing with that money?
And it makes for a more transparent relationship
with the older person themselves.
'cause they can see what they're paying for
and what they're getting for that money as well.
So for us, it's just always been the way we've done it.
So we don't, we didn't realize it was that innovative,
but looking at your system with a single price, uh,
I suspect it's the better way to go to come to our system.
Thank you. I agree. No, I think
we're pretty close to time.
Any other members have questions?
Tom, thank you very much for joining us today
for taking the time to do so.
It's always good to hear your insights.
Thank you for meeting with the health committee.
You are very welcome. Uh, I hope you enjoy the rest
of the, the, the day.
It's very cold here. I'm sure it is there. Uh,
And, Uh, I need to go and turn the heating on.
So, uh, good luck to you. Good to see you again.
Excellent. Thank you. Thank, it's here.
Okay. Um, we have grant search field coming up next.
You should have a letter from him.
Is there a hear hearing loss
and the impact this has on dementia?
Small form. Mm. Lot to say.
We're on. On. Oh, it's on.
Excellent. Hey Grant, thank you
very much for joining us today. Um,
Yeah, ki Here
for 10 minutes, uh, with the health committee.
Got all of our members here around, um, uh,
we received your letter, um, noting the, the, uh,
the strong link, the correlation between, uh,
untreated hearing loss and dementia.
Um, but we've got 10 minutes to discuss that further
with you, but I'll give it to you to lead off.
And if you wanna leave us time for questioning. Yeah,
Great. Thank you.
Um, so just some background.
I'm professor in audiology
and head of audiology at the University of Auckland.
Um, so I'm coming from this from the,
the academic, uh, perspective.
Um, this is largely promoted by a Lancet report
in the UK in, uh, around, uh, 2020
that identified that the leading risk factor for dementia,
um, that is modifiable, that is, that we're not born
with is hearing loss.
And this accounts for 8% of the risk
at mid-age.
Um, and in New Zealand, that, uh, report was repeated
for European, Asian, Maori, and Pacific peoples.
And again, in European
and Asian New Zealanders, hearing loss
at midlife came out as the highest risk factor for
dementia at 8%.
And that was above obesity
and, uh, hypertension, which come out at around, um,
six 4% respectively amongst Maori.
It's the second highest risk factor, um, similar
for Pacific peoples with obesity, uh,
ranking higher as a risk factor.
But now put this in context.
Um, you know, we're all aware of the effects
that hearing loss has in communication
amongst the older population.
We've all got older relatives in which we perhaps struggle
to communicate with, and we can, uh, propose
and think about the ways that this impacts the lives.
Uh, hearing loss loan is estimated
to affect the New Zealand economy about, uh,
$1 billion per annum.
Uh, however, if we were able to slow
or reduce the onset of dementia amongst that 8%,
uh, we'd make, uh, significant savings, uh,
in healthcare services and, uh, lost productivity.
So what I really, my, my purpose is just to make you aware
of this very significant fact,
because I think in a lot of the public health information
that we see, we're all told, uh, to be aware of, um,
you know, avoiding smoking health and so on, uh,
and make sure we, uh, actively are involved in, um,
community and social events.
But the effect of hearing loss is often ignored.
So really my primary purpose of this presentation is just
to raise the members, uh, awareness of this.
And that hearing loss is not just that effect
that we experience, um, as we get older,
but it has that impact on, uh, dementia
that we need to be careful of.
And of course, the possibility
that early intervention with hearing aids may stall some
of its effect, and then consequently reduce the cost
to health burden of dementia down track.
Thank you. Um, I should
Thank you, um, professor search field.
I have a few questions about the practicalities of
how this might be implemented.
Could you please explain when the best time
to screeners your document?
Your letter to us says midlife,
but then you've also got a, um, a paragraph
that notes a study you've recently published that says, um,
that we're looking at people
with poorer than average cognition.
So obviously I assume
that's when some cognitive decline has already started.
Yes. So can you tell me the pros
and cons of, of when screening is initiated?
So the study you referred to was an HRC funded study
that we looked at, um,
to see whether there was benefit of hearing aids.
We deliberately sampled so that we had individuals, uh,
over 65 who had below average cognition.
They weren't, uh, experiencing dementia,
but they were below average.
The reason for sampling that was so
that we could potentially show improvement, um,
rather than people who were already excellent.
We didn't view that hearing aids would make them more
excellent at cognitive tasks.
So midlife, um, a number of proposals being put forward.
I believe N-Z-I-E-R has,
has been looking at a proposal around, uh, 55.
But that sample that I referred to in
that paper was over 60 fives.
The evidence widely in the intervention
with hearing aids suggests that individuals
who already have dementia do not benefit
from having hearing aids.
It's not a cure for dementia,
but rather it may slow that cognitive decline, if you like,
the arc towards dementia.
Um, so what it may mean is that individuals with a risk
of dementia may have that delayed by a number
of years if they have hearing aids at midlife.
Um, and so there is no firm cutoff there.
Um, but we're assuming around about 55.
Thank you. Um, can you please tell me the frequency
with which screening needs to be repeated?
Uh, for my understanding, that hasn't been investigated.
Um, the proposal was, um, in
and around general practitioners including this
on a regular basis in their health checks with individuals.
So it would rely on individuals attending their
general practitioner.
But the work towards, uh,
a screening program has not been something
that I've been specifically involved in.
And so I can't provide a lot of detail in and around that.
Um, my work has primarily been looking at, uh,
the interventions if the a cognitive
impairment has been found,
Uh, understood. But
you're the first expert I've met on this matter,
so I'm dying to ask you No.
What what about the infrastructure required
to conduct the screening?
Is, is, is
that a device typically available in a general practice?
If not, how much does it cost? Yeah.
So, uh, within the general practice, um,
typically this might be in the form of a questionnaire.
Um, and that would provide the, the screening
that would then be elevated to psychology for evaluation as
to whether there is, um, a cognitive decline
and what the nature of that.
There is debate in audiology
where the individual may in fact first show up whether
screening for cognition is within scope of practice.
There'll be those that would argue yes.
Um, and I, I'm certainly one of those.
And the question then becomes on identification
and screening of cognition, um,
whether there's any different effects
and whether that would be different from screening
for hearing per se.
So hearing in itself
and screening for that is a much simpler process.
Um, and, um, many GP practices have apps
or similar devices.
Often these are provided by hearing clinics
and to, uh, engage in business transactions,
but these are relatively low cost, um,
methods for screening.
So you've just outlined two methods there.
Which one is best?
One is screening for cognitive decline
and then going on to test the hearing of those people
with early cognitive decline.
The other is screening everyone for hearing hearing loss.
Um, ha have those been compared in terms
of the practicalities and costs
and benefits of, of each? Yeah.
The, the practicalities would be
that the hearing loss screening would be much simpler.
The argument of course, there is that, um, you are,
um, screening for hearing
and you're assuming from that particular point
that those individuals would be part of that risk profile.
Uh, not specifically targeting individuals.
It does lay add another layer of complexity around that,
that I think would be quite difficult
to manage if you are specifically selecting individuals, um,
and recommending on that basis
from a public health perspective, I think what we're trying
to do is to get elevate hearing loss into the same
discussion is keeping active
and healthy in your activities, engaging and,
and social activities.
We are really trying to achieve that
because currently really isn't within
the dialogue that we hear.
Sure. And I think, yeah.
Oh, just to conclude, it also is a addition.
The people also learn about their, um, no, no
participation in community, don't they?
Exactly. Yeah. Thank you.
And you're probably also one
of the first PE people I've ever had the ability to
ask about, about the link, um, about this is,
and I appreciate people lose hearing
for a variety of reasons.
And one of the reasons, of course, is industrial deafness
exposure to LA large noise.
Is there a difference in the causes of deafness?
So I suppose what, what, I'm kind of taking a step further,
actually being preventative to actually prevent if,
if there are an industrial setting blocking that loss, um,
does that have an effect?
Um, or is it,
or is it just specific, specific types of hearing loss
that we're actually actually protecting, um,
or lead to, to dementia later in life?
Or it be a risk factor for that dementia?
So, so if we could reduce the number of individuals
with hearing loss, and ultimately then there would be a
trickle on effect to reducing proportionately the number
of people that might develop dementia.
Uh, so what we do know is that it's acquired hearing loss.
So individuals who are born deaf do not appear
to have this risk, primarily
because they are engaging in communication
through a different mode.
So the individuals that are at risk here are those
that acquire hearing loss
through noise induced hearing loss,
or through the natural aging process.
The science isn't at the point where we can disentangle
those or identify individuals at particular risk.
Uh, but your comment is correct.
If we could reduce, um, the onset
of noise induced hearing loss, likely that there would be,
uh, reduction in, uh, ongoing effects there.
I think it's good.
We we're pretty much on time. Last question
Very quick.
Thank you. Um, what I'm hearing from the presentation,
and I'm very interested in this from a connection
and senior's perspective, is
that you get a double benefit from the hearing loss, um,
screening because you get connection regardless
of whether someone is going to go on to get dementia.
And it, I dunno if this is a question
or a statement that, um, I'm curious
to know if anyone from the university is looking seriously
at the, from a policy perspective at costing
and at the opportunity cost
or what the benefits would be doing comprehensive screening
and then going on to provide hearing aids to those
who might need them, and what in those two PA parcels
of people, and some will be in a
Venn diagram in both of them.
Um, what that will support not only in terms
of reduced healthcare costs, but also, uh, quality of life
and longevity.
Um, it is something I think from a policy development
perspective that could be incredibly valuable
and help you meet your target of, uh,
wanting to mainstream this.
Yeah. I do know that NZ IER has been commissioned
by hearing aid, um, clinics group to investigate this.
Uh, and their, their view is that they, the cost
to fully meet needs, uh, the hearing aid area is between,
uh, 30 and 100 million.
Um, but if you were to actually be able to reduce dementia
by 5%, so that's just saying a portion
of the 8% risk, then you'd save the economy, um,
295 million.
So I think that the question there is, there does have
to be a, a, a proper economic analysis,
but on the back of an envelope, uh,
what I've done would suggest that there is significant
economic benefit, uh, acknowledging
that this would be paying ahead, um,
and that the benefit wouldn't be seen for a number of years
after the, the hearing aids
Point. We'd love to see
any of those documents if we could.
Yes. There's any modeling on that. Thank you.
Thank you very much. That was wonderful to have you here.
Um, um, the committee really enjoyed it.
It's not often we get an audiologist.
Appreciate, appreciate that.
Um, happy to contribute as needed.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Thank you, professor. Bye.
Bye.
Thanks. That's on
stuff wouldn't fly at Deutsche Bank.
What?
Talking about It's good.
I did get my condition though.
I was pleased about that airport.
You, we wouldn't need much. I any,
You don't even, we're on.
We're on. We're on. Hello.
Um, what was good to have you here. Um, good to have him.
And here we've got Dr. Duncan McKellar, um, is just you
or is Charles joining us too? Uh,
Look, I think Charles should be joining us.
Um, there was a bit of a communication,
literally just this moment got the,
the a message through that.
Um, the meeting was going ahead and, and got the link.
So if you give me a a moment,
I'll just message Charles and well, let's,
We've only got 10 minutes
because we have a bunch of officials coming in before.
Sure. Now we'll look, let's, let's get moving.
Um, and I will, um, start asking you questions.
I'll just quickly message Charles, uh, at the same time.
No worries. I, I think what the best thing for us to,
to get out of you Duncan, would be, um, 'cause we came up
and visited, um, a couple of six weeks or so ago now, and,
and there were a couple of things that got pulled out
as being the, the key pieces that HammondCare do.
Yes. Mm-hmm. I wasn't on that particular subgroup,
which I think had the, the great discoveries.
But if you can give us what the, say, the one
or two best things that you think Incare is doing, um,
that we should be taking consideration
of, that would be very helpful. Thank you.
Sure. So Sam, I guess, um, so,
so I think you were in the group with me, weren't you?
So, um, I know that we talked, uh, a a bit about
Dementia Support Australia, which is the program that, uh,
HammondCare runs on behalf of the Commonwealth of Australia,
so of the Department of Health, disability and Aging.
Um, so in my view, um, that's the program
that I'm intimately involved with.
Um, that's one of the best initiatives
of the Commonwealth in Australia, um,
over the last sort of decade.
Uh, the other part of
that being the specialist dementia care program, which is,
uh, an increased funding for aged care providers
to support people with dementia who present
with changed behaviors. What
Was the first one called? Sorry?
Dementia Support Australia.
So that is a large, um, that's a, a, a national program
operates, um, funded fully by the Commonwealth so
that the services that we provide, um, are free to all,
to the community
and to all members of the, the age care sector.
Um, and so HammondCare has the contract
with the Commonwealth to deliver that program.
Um, the focus of that program is support of people
with dementia and those people caring
for them when behavior changes.
So, um, is it, It's,
it's much more than a hotline.
So it's an active on the ground,
boots on the ground service.
So, so,
and it's available to everybody from people living in the
community, right through to, um,
people living in residential aged care environments, um,
where, you know, behavior change can be quite extreme.
Um, and then it now also extends into the hospital sector.
So we run a program called the Hospital to Age Care
Dementia Support, um, program, which is all about helping
move people out of hospitals.
So one of the problems we have in Australia is, of course,
it is quite a, a large population of people with dementia
who become stranded in hospital beds, usually
around the complexity of their care needs.
And, um, the, the, the complexity
that changed behavior results in, in,
in there being difficulties for them
to transition into aged care placements.
Um, and so we also now, as part
of the Dementia Support Australia suite of programs,
we now also offer a transitional support program
where we help, um, sustainably transition people out
of those stranded hospital places of care into
sustainable aged care placements.
Um, so it's a, it's quite a big program, quite extensive,
um, and it operates across the country.
Thanks, Hamish. Excellent. Thank you.
Um, and I appreciate, um, you mentioned that the dementia,
uh, I can't remember what the program's name, it's not,
it's not a hotline, uh, the behavioral change.
Um, can you explain to the committee, um, what,
what that actually includes?
Um, because I do believe you've got, uh, dementia experts
that can help, um,
and also potentially, um, what kind of respite care
that may also be required around people with them.
Okay. Um, so firstly, with, with regards to the what's
provided, um, in much more than a hotline.
Uh, so we do have a twenty four seven phone service.
So the first point of contact
with Dementia Support Australia usually,
usually is a, is a phone call.
So somebody will call us
and say, we need to make a referral, or we need your help.
Um, we, that goes, if a call comes through, goes through
to a triage process.
So we have dementia consultants, so these are practitioners
who have expertise in, uh, care of people with dementia,
with changed behaviors.
They take the call, they'll work through the call.
Um, and, uh, we now have some the sort of,
we've recently introduced some fairly sophisticated
AI technology as well to assist with that triage process.
From there, the case will get, that person will be allocated
to sort of one of our different service streams
that go from everything from just following up with, with,
um, telehealth sort of phone led service through right
through to, um, somebody being on the ground.
So a practitioner being actually out where that person is,
whether it be at home or whether it be in their residential
aged care environment within, uh, 24 to 48 hours
to directly assess and engage with them.
So, um, and from there we sort of kind of work up the case.
We have a number of, we've got about nine, uh,
specialist medical practitioners that work
with the program now as well.
So I'm one of those, I'm an,
I'm a psych geriatrician, so an old age psychiatrist.
We also have a number of geriatricians
who work into the program, and we also then provide some
clinical support across the whole of that program.
So it's much more robust than a phone line,
and it's much more hands-on.
And, um, so we fly to every,
we'll go anywhere in, in Australia.
So we, um, charter a plane if we need to.
We've covered 98%, we've been into 98%
of care homes across the country.
Um, and that includes regional
and remote, um, parts of the country as well.
So we, we will, you know, charter planes if we need to,
to get, to get people where they need to be.
So it's very much boots on the ground.
Um, now your second question was about respite,
and I noticed that Charles is online as well.
Charles, did you wanna make a comment about, um,
how respite services work in Australia, um,
and what's available
and what HammondCare might be involved with?
So, HammondCare is Hamming Care's involvement in respite
services is, uh, not necessarily the norm.
We, we run a number of standalone respite, uh,
cottages within kind of normal suburban communities.
The, the norm is certainly within
most residential FA facilities across the country,
there will be some respite beds set aside, um,
as opposed to sort of a dedicated cottage
or a dedicated service.
Um, but that is, uh, my understanding of the funding of
that is that it's, it's still funded through, um, uh,
or it's still sort of federally funded
and, uh, it's a, it's an independent sort
of funding from the normal funding model
that goes into a residential facility.
So anac is the primary, uh, funding instrument
for care into residential homes.
Um, and respite services are funded alongside that.
Um, so it's a, it's a high demand service, um,
but typically not like the, the front end for most providers
that, that will be a portion of beds they'll set aside.
Um, I dunno if that Dun Duncan, did you get a chance also
to mention the s dcps before
I did mention SDPs, which sort
of is a parallel commonwealth program
that sits alongside DSA or Dementia Support Australia.
Apologies. Um, yeah.
Uh, and that, that's a really valuable system
and, um, innovation for Australia.
Uh, that, so with the Specialist Dementia Care program,
the Commonwealth decided a number of years ago
that we needed to increase the capability of
care homes to be able to respond to people
with significantly changed behavior.
Um, which means an increased staffing ratio,
extra resources layered in more clinical support.
Uh, so they set up this program, the, the SDCP,
the Specialist Care Dementia Program.
Essentially, it's, it's around a model of, uh,
it's not a lot of money actually.
It's an extra a hundred dollars, uh, per day, oh, sorry,
no extra $300 per person per day into the program,
into small cottage like models where there are, um, eight
residents living in a supported environment, um,
with outdoor access,
with those specialist services layered in, um,
for the period of time
that they have significantly changed behavior.
And the idea is that that's transitional
and that ultimately they would move on.
Um, typically the, the, the duration of stay is somewhere
around 12 months in one of those units.
Um, the Commonwealth committed
to established 35 of those units.
We are up to about, oh, 25, 26, something like that.
Now around the country, HammondCare is the largest
single aged care provider.
Um, providing those, there are a number of other providers
that are engaged with the program as well,
but HammondCare has got the largest, uh, group of those
because it's an area of interest for us.
Um, they are a game changer.
My only comment on that would be that I think
that probably the commonwealth's, um, population,
uh, numbers around are, are these enough to meet need?
Would I, I suspect that we'll get to 35
and we'll say we probably need a few more as well.
The, the idea was though,
that they would put one in each PHN.
So they're the, the primary health networks.
They're the commonwealth funded sort of, um, bodies. Bodies.
Yeah.
Thank You. We are, we're pretty
much on time here, guys. We've got,
Can I just ask one more question very quickly.
Um, and just getting back to your dementia support, um,
Hammond Ki also provides residential care,
but you've got a contract with, with the government
to provide support for people with dementia.
Where, where does, where does the funding take you to,
where's the boundary between what you are funded to do
through, uh, dementia support
and someone going getting, uh, home care
or residential care care bearing in mind?
You can probably provide both,
but I assume that a lot of, um, a lot
of your patients will go different providers. Yes.
So the Dementia Support Australia program, we keep
that fairly carefully.
Ring barked, uh, um, ring Mark, sorry, I
to it's, it's a separate program.
So we run that as a free service
on behalf of the Commonwealth.
Um, all of our home care
and our, um, residential care
businesses are run separate to that.
So, uh, we are very careful around the potential
for a conflict of interest between the two entities.
Um, probably, you know, so
DSA is a very well developed program now
and it would be difficult to think
that there'd be another entity in Australia that could sort
of pick that level of service provision up at this stage.
There's been a lot of careful development, a lot
of data go into that over the last, um,
or here they're heading towards a decade
that that's been running now.
Um, but it runs very carefully as a separate
publicly available publicly facing service,
whereas HammondCare then, as an aged care provider,
runs its residential care
and it's home care services like any other, um,
aged care provider in the country.
Thank you. Thank you, uh, Duncan. Thank you Charles.
Good to have you both here today.
Um, appreciate your contributions to the committee
and for taking the time to speak with us.
No problems. All the best. Cheers. Thank you.